Post: 2020 Interview Retro (#46)
agude/agude.github.io: _drafts/2020-09-23-interviewing_for_data_science_positions_in_2020.md

---
layout: post
title: "Data Science Interviews During the 2020 Pandemic"
description: >
  In the middle of the COVID-19 pandemic, I found myself looking for a data
  science job for the third time in my life. This post covers what I learned.
image: /files/2020-interviewing/nighhawks_crop.jpg
image_alt: >
  A crop of Hopper's Nighthawks, showing a man in a suit sitting alone at the
  counter of a diner.
categories: python_patterns
---

{% include lead_image.html %}

> I started looking for a job this year, in the [middle of a pandemic][covid],

Reviewer: Not sure you need to mention COVID twice in the same sentence

structure is:

[interviews]: {% post_url 2017-09-18-interviews-respect-time %}

- **Prescreen**: A resume or recruiter screen of the candidate, often offline.
- **Technical Screen**: A call with a team member or a take home assignment to
  assess the candidate's technical skills.
- **On-site Interview Loop**: An all day interview with multiple team members
  and the hiring manager.

Although all the companies structured the interviews well, several failed at
communicating and scheduling. Some took an entire month to convey feedback
from an interview step.

I don't know why some recruiters struggle with communicating with
candidates---it seems like table stakes in their profession---but I have seen
it every time I have interviewed. Companies that communicate effectively and
decide quickly have a strong advantage in recruiting talent.

### Salary Negotiation

The first conversation with every recruiter in 2017 involved talking about
present salary and future expectations. In 2020, not a single recruiter asked
about compensation until after they had made a verbal offer. This surprised me
because waiting to open negotiations until that late in the process offers the

> candidate an advantage; the company has already spent considerable resources
> in interviewing!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
candidate an advantage as they now know that the company has strong interest in them.
```

2018][salary_law] which could be the reason for this behavior, but it
specifically _does not_ ban asking about salary expectations. It might be that
the more senior roles I'm interviewing for now are hard enough to find
candidates for that the companies don't want to reject anyone without a chance
to get the candidate [committed to the role][loss].

[salary_law]: https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes_displaySection.xhtml?sectionNum=432.3&lawCode=LAB
[loss]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loss_aversion

### Technical Screens

In 2015 and 2017 I had real trouble with the technical screens. Often they
were stereotypical _engineering_ interviews where I was asked to [invert a
binary search tree][tweet] or some other question that had never come up in my
job as a data scientist. I was able to solve these problems when I had seen
them before in my studies or could come up with the _"trick"_ on the fly. I
passed about half of my technical screens.

[tweet]: https://twitter.com/mxcl/status/608682016205344768

In 2020, my experience was vastly different. Only one screen was even close to
"invert this BST", and that was a mistake where they later admitted that I was

> given the _software engineering_ technical hone screen accidentally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
accidentally given the _software engineering_ technical phone screen.
```

All of the other screens involved reasonable questions that would come up in a

> data scientist's day to day work like manipulating a dataset, calculating some

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data scientist's daily work, like manipulating a dataset, calculating some
```

simple features, or implementing really simple algorithms or metrics. With
these more applied questions, I passed all of my technical screens!

### Virtual On-Sites

In 2017 on-sites were on site! In 2020 they are done via video conferencing. I

> thought virtual on-sites would be less draining, but I felt even more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
thought virtual on-sites would be less draining, but I actually felt even more
```

> exhausted after them. I missed the opportunity to get lunch with a team member
> that the normal on-site provided, but I still felt I was able to connect well
> with the interviewers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
exhausted after them. However,  I still felt I was able to connect well
with the interviewers despite no longer having the opportunity to eat lunch 
with a team member as in normal on-sites.
```

#### Whiteboard Coding

There were fewer coding problems during the on-sites than previously and all
of them were done in an online editor instead of on a whiteboard. This worked
great!

I actually found myself looking forward to the coding challenges because, with
the improvement of coding on **an actual computer**, they were a nice break
from the other interviews. Just like the technical screens these questions
were all directly applicable to the work I would be doing.

#### Open-ended Problems and Behavioral Questions

This time there were more open-ended interviews that dug into some problem the

> business had (like "How would you help us filter spam?") or went really deep

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
business had (e.g. "How would you help us filter spam?") or went really deep
```

> on a project I had worked on previously. I would get some of these questions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
exploring a project I had worked on previously. Although I was asked some of these questions
```

> during my previous years of interviewing, but they felt much more effective in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
during my previous years of interviewing they felt much more effective in
```

{% capture pass %}<span style="color:ForestGreen">Pass</span>{% endcapture %}
{% capture fail %}<span style="color:Red">Reject</span>{% endcapture %}
{% capture declined %}<span style="color:DarkBlue">Declined</span>{% endcapture %}
{% capture accepted %}<span style="color:ForestGreen">Accepted</span>{% endcapture %}

TODO: Update Offer column to be correct.

| **Company**      | Prescreen | Technical Screen |                 On-Site |        Offer |
|------------------|----------:|-----------------:|------------------------:|-------------:|
| **DocuSign**     |  {{pass}} |         {{pass}} | {{declined}}[^docusign] |          --- |
| **Grand Rounds** |  {{pass}} |         {{pass}} |                {{fail}} |          --- |
| **Salesforce**   |  {{fail}} |              --- |                     --- |          --- |
| **Square**       |  {{pass}} |         {{pass}} |                {{pass}} | {{accepted}} |
| **Stripe**       |  {{pass}} |         {{pass}} |                {{fail}} |          --- |
| **Twitch**       |  {{pass}} |         {{pass}} |                {{pass}} | {{declined}} |
| **Twitter**      |  {{pass}} |         {{pass}} |                {{fail}} |          --- |

> I am very happy with how well technical screens went this time around, as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I am very happy with how well the technical screens went this time around, as
```

mentioned above. I also feel good about the on-site to offer rate. I felt that
the Twitch, Twitter, and Square interviews all went well, so I am disappointed
by the lack of an offer from Twitter.

The Stripe interview revealed the position to be less well aligned with my

> skill set[^ab] and career aspirations than I'd hope, so I think the reject
> there is fair.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
skill set[^ab] and career aspirations than I'd hoped, so I think their decision
to not extend an offer was fair.
```

> I generally do not apply to work for startups, for a variety of reasons

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I generally do not apply to work for startups, for a variety of reasons both
```

> personal and [financial][sense]. I agreed to interview at Grand Rounds after a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
personal and [financial][sense]. However, I agreed to interview at Grand Rounds after a
```
